---
description: Decompose the code using functions
---

# 4.1 Functions

### Define Functions

Functions are a set of instructions grouped together to perform a specific task. Python comes with many built-in functions such as len() to get the length of a collection and sorted() to sort the elements in a list. However, you can define your own functions when you want to make your code more organized and reusable.

Use the keyword "def" to define new functions. Give your functions descriptive names. Remember, you cannot use variables or functions before you define them.

Organizing all your function definitions at the top of the file is a best practice.

```python
def greet():
    print('Hello, World!')
    
greet()

shout() # produces a NameError; the function has not yet been defined

def shout():
    print('Yeeee HAAAAWWWWW!!!')
```

Assign the output of functions to new or existing variables with the return statement. If a function does not have a return statement, the return value is None.

```python
def get_age():
    return 24

def get_height():
    x = 10
    # functions doesn't return anything

height = get_height()
    
print(get_age())     # prints 24
print(type(height))  # prints <class 'NoneType'>
```

{% hint style="success" %}
Functions always return a value. If a function doesn't contain a return statement, the function returns the **None** value.
{% endhint %}

Give your functions **descriptive** names. In the code sample below, the only good function name is check\_email().

```python
def a():
    pass
    
def do_something():
    pass

def check():
    pass

def check_email()  # the only good function name
    pass
```

### Recursion

Recursion occurs when a function is used to call itself. Certain problems can be solved more easily by using recursion. For example, the factorial of 5 is denoted as 5! and is calculated by multiplying n\*(n-1) until n equals 1: 5\*4\*3\*2\*1.

```python
def calculate_factorial(n):
    if n == 1:
        return 1
    else:
        return n * calculate_factorial(n-1)

print(calculate_factorial(5))
```

Be careful of creating infinite loops. Infinite loops are those that have no terminating, or base, statement that no longer calls the function. An If-statement is typically used to stop the recursion and return a base value.

```python
def create_infinite_loop(n):
    n += 1
    create_infinite_loop(n)
    # creates a RecursionError

print(create_infinite_loop(1))
```

If a functions calls itself more than 1,000 times in a row, the RecursionError is triggered.
