---
description: Python Built-In Exceptions Hierarchy
---

# 4.3 Exceptions

Exceptions occur when your program runs into an unexpected error. The program must handle the exception immediately or terminate. Python has many different types of exceptions to represent different situations. Examples include: dividing by zero, using an out of range index value for a list, invalid syntax and types, running out of memory, and so on.

Most exceptions are non-fatal errors, and when handled correctly, will allow your code to continue running.

Handling exceptions is based on a hierarchy of Python exception classes. Below is a basic hierarchy of a few built-in exceptions.

* BaseException
  * SystemExit
  * KeyboardInterrupt
  * Exception
    * ArithmeticError
      * ZeroDivisionError
    * LookupError
      * IndexError
      * KeyError
    * NameError
    * RuntimeError
    * SyntaxError
      * IndentationError
    * SystemError
    * TypeError
    * ValueError

The BaseException class is the base class for all built-in exceptions in Python. The Exception class is the most commonly inherited exception. Most errors exceptions inherit from the Exception class, as well as any custom exception you define yourself.

**SystemExit** is raised when calling the **sys.exit()** method, which stops the currently running script.

**KeyboardInterrupt** is raised when the user presses a key combination to abort the script when it's running. In most terminal applications, the keystroke is CTRL+C.

**ArithmeticError** is the base class for arithmetic errors.

**ZeroDivisionError** is raised when trying to divide by zero.

**LookupError** is the base class for errors in referencing collections.

**IndexError** is raised when trying to access a value with an index that lies outside the possible range of a list or tuple.

**KeyError** is raised when trying to access the key value in a dictionary that does not contain the key specified.

**NameError** is raised when referencing a variable, function, or other object that does not exist.

**RuntimeError** is raised when after the program passes the interpreter's syntax checks but runs into a problem later. This may include typos in variable names, type conversion failures, wrong data types, and more.

**SyntaxError** is raised when the interpreter finds improper use of Python syntax.

**IndentationError** is raised when the interpreter encounters inconsistent use of spaces in your indentation.

**SystemError** is raised when something goes wrong with the interpreter.

**TypeError** is raised when the inappropriate data type is encountered. For instance, when you try to divide a number by a string.

**ValueError** is raised when the data type is correct but the value is wrong.

