---
description: Basics of Python Exception Handling
---

# 4.4 Exception Handling

The Try-Except block of code lets you try executing Python code and if an error occurs, let's you handle that error. In the following example, the print statement will create an exception because the index is out of range.

As a result, the print statement does not execute, but the except block of code does.

```python
names = ['Charlie', 'Lucy', 'Linus']
try:
    print(names[4])
except:
    print('An error occured')
```

It's possible to stack multiple exception blocks together to handle different errors differently. In the following example, the print statement produces an IndexError exception, and only the code in the IndexError exception is executed.

```python
names = ['Charlie', 'Lucy', 'Linus']
try:
    print(names[4])
except IndexError:
    print('That index does not exist')
except:
    print('An unknown error occured')
```

Next, there is the try-except-else method. In the example below, the print statement in the try block prints correctly, the except block is skipped, and the else block is executed.

```python
try:
    print('Hello, World!')
except:
    print('Something went wrong!')
else:
    print('Everything is fine.')
```

### Create Your Own Exception

You can raise your own exceptions. For instance, if you wanted to check user input when entering their age, the following would raise an exception if the user enters a number less than 0 or greater than 100 for their age.

```python
age = int(input('Enter your age: '))
if age < 0 or age > 100:
    raise ValueError('Age is not a valid number.')
```

### Exception Propagation

When an exception occurs in Python, the interpreter looks for any suitable exception handler. Exceptions can be handled by any functions that are used to call that code.

In the following example, the divide() function raises an exception, passes it back to my\_function, which then passes it back to the try-block that was called, which handles the exception.

```python
def divide():
    num = 1/0

def my_function():
    divide()
    
try:
    my_function()
except ZeroDivisionError:
    print('Zero division error caught')
except:
    print('An unkown error occured')
```

As Python programs become larger and the code is split apart into different files and modules, it's a good idea to try to handle exceptions where they occur.
