---
description: Understand Fundamental Terms and Definitions
---

# 1.1 Terms and Definitions

Python is a high-level language that is easy to read, write, and maintain. It was created in 1999 by Guido van Rossum who wanted a language that was:

* easy and intuitive
* free and open source
* understandable as plain English
* suitable for everyday tasks&#x20;

Programs written in high-level languages such as Python are called **source code**. The files that contain the source code are called **source files**. Source files are essentially just simple text files.

Every language has elements that make up its structure and meaning. It's important to use elements in the right order for the program to run correctly and to have the desired output. The program must be correct in a several ways:

* **lexically** - every language has its own dictionary of words
* **syntactically** - the structure of language rules that must be obeyed
* **semantically** - the key words and syntax must be composed in a way that makes sense

### Interpreting vs. Compiling

**Compilation** occurs when the source code is translated into machine code and distributed as a single executable file, such as an .exe file on Windows, or apps on the macOS App Store. The program that performs the compiling is called a _compiler_. The users of compiled applications can more easily share and run the programs than with scripts and interpreted languages.

**Interpreting** occurs when the source code is translated each time the program runs. The program doing the translating is called an _interpreter_. The advantage with interpreted languages is that the source code runs on any system that has an interpreter installed. The code is stored using the programming language, making it easier to change and modify. However, interpreted programs tend to run slower than compiled programs.

Python is an **interpreted language**. The Python interpreter is needed if you wish to write Python programs and run them on your computer.

Historically, interpreted languages have been called **scripting languages**, and the programs that use them are **scripts**.

All scripting and compiled languages consist of commands known as an **instructions**. Each instruction, or statement, typically begins on a new line and tells the compiler or interpreter to execute a single operation. Python instructions are read from left to right and from top to bottom.

