# 1.2 Python's Logic and Structure

### Keywords

Programming languages contain reserved keywords that cannot be used as variable, class, or function names. These words are used to define the syntax and structure of the language. As of version 3.10.5, Python has 35 reserved [keywords](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical\_analysis.html#keywords).&#x20;

```
False      await      else       import     pass
None       break      except     in         raise
True       class      finally    is         return
and        continue   for        lambda     try
as         def        from       nonlocal   while
assert     del        global     not        with
async      elif       if         or         yield
```

The following sections and pages will describe the relevant keywords you need to know to pass the PCEP exam.

### Instructions

Instructions, or statements, are what the Python interpreter executes. Statements can be single-line instructions or they can span multiple lines. A backslash is required when the statement extends to the next line.

Multi-line statements can help organize code, making it easier to read and edit. Programmers often create lists, tuples, and dictionaries by spanning the elements across multiple lines.

**Semi-colons** are not required in Python. However, you can use them to separate multiple statements on a single line.

```python
a = 1

nums = 1 + 2 + 3 + \
       4 + 5 + 6 + \
       7 + 8 + 9

names = ['Toad',
         'Badger',
         'Ratty',
         'Mole']

for i in range(1,11):
    if i % 2 == 0:
        print(i)

x = 1; y = 2; z = 3
```

{% hint style="success" %}
Remember that a backlash can serve as a line break when writing Python statements.
{% endhint %}

### Indentation

Other languages might use curly brackets to create blocks of code but in Python, spaces serve that purpose instead. The indentation groups statements into blocks of code that functions, if-else statements, for loops, and classes execute.&#x20;

```python
a = 4
b = 3
if a > b:
    print('a is larger than b')

while a > 0:
    a -= 1
    b += 1
    print(a + b)
```

Python will return an error if the code indentation is incorrect. You can use single or multiple spaces for indentation. Using **four spaces** is a best practice.

### Comments

Comments can be added to your Python code using the hash symbol. Multi-line comments are added with triple single, or triple double, quotes.

```python
# this is a single line comment
print('Hello, World!')

"""
This is a long comment
that spans three
lines
"""
print('Hello again!')
```

Do not overuse comments, but don't under use them either. You variable and function names should be descriptive enough to convey meaning. Comments can help explain complex parts of code.
