# 1.3 Literals and Variables

### Boolean, integers, floating-point numbers

**Boolean** values in Python can be either True or False. Boolean values are returned when evaluating expressions and are often used in conditional statements and iterative loops.

They can also be represented numerically as 1 or 0, which means you can use them in operations.

Use the bool() function to evaluate a variable and return the boolean representation. Most variables are True if they have content. Empty lists, tuples, dictionaries and the number 0 return False.

```python
print(3 > 4) # prints False

is_tall = False
is_short = True

print(is_tall + is_short) # prints 1

print(bool(is_tall)) # prints True
print(bool(0)) # prints False
```

**Integers** are whole numbers and can be either positive or negative. Large integers can be difficult to read when they consist of many digits. Python allows the use of underscores in numeric literals to improve readability.

```python
a = 3
b = 4
population = 333_076_834
```

**Float**, or "floating point numbers", contain decimals and can be represented by simple dot-notation or with **scientific notation** where "e", or "E", is used to indicate the power of 10. Floating point numbers are **approximations**. The result of float operations may not be exactly what you expect. This is something to consider when using floats.

```python
pie = 3.14159

a = 1.5e3 #1500
b = 1.5E4 #15000

print(.1 + .1 + .1 == .3) # prints False
print(.1 + .1 + .1)       # prints 0.30000000000000004
```

### Strings

Strings in Python are represented by a series of characters surrounded by single, double, or triple quotes. Apostrophes in strings must be **escaped** if using single quotes. They do not need to be escaped when using double-quotes.

```python
greeting = 'Hello World'
print(greeting)

greeting2 = 'My name\'s Jonas'
print(greeting2)

greeting3 = '''It
is a
wonderful day!
'''
print(greeting3)
```

Strings are like Lists in how you access single characters by indexing and slicing. You can also loop through a string, get its length, and check if a string contains substring.

```python
greeting = 'Hello World'
print(greeting[0])      # prints H
print(greeting[0:5])    # prints Hello

for c in greeting:
    print(c)            # prints each letter on a new line

length = len(greeting)  # assigns the number 11 to length

if 'W' in greeting:
    print('The string contains a "W"') # this line executes
```

Strings can be created using either single or double quotes. Choose one or the other and stick with it to maintain consistency in your code. The Python community prefers single quotes when creating and working with strings.

### Numeral Systems

Python has support for binary, octal, decimal, and hexadecimal numeral systems.

**Binary numbers** are comprised of 1s and 0s and are prefixed with "0b" or "0B". The binary system is a base-2 number system. The value 10 equals 2, 100 equals 4, 110 equals 6, and so on. For every place added, you multiply by 2 to determine the decimal value. For example:

0 and 1 translate as 0 and 1, respectively.

10 translates as 2 + 0 and becomes 2

11 translates as 2 + 1 and becomes 3

100 translates as 4 + 0 + 0 and becomes 4.

101 translates as 4 + 0 + 1 and becomes 5.

```python
binary1 = 0b100 # 4
binary2 = 0b101 # 5

print(binary1 + binary2) # prints 9
```

**Octal numbers** are limited to 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. The octal system is a base-8 numerical system. The numbers are prefixed with "0o".

```python
octal1 = 0o07 #7
octal2 = 0o10 #8

print(octal1 + octal2) # prints 15
```

**Hexadecimal numbers** use sixteen digits: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, and F. The numbers are prefixed with "0x".

```python
hex1 = 0x09 # 9
hex2 = 0x0A # 10

print(hex1 + hex2) # prints 19
```

Working with different numeric systems can be tricky but all you need to know for the PCEP exam is how to recognize the different systems.

### Variables

Variables are created when you assign value to them. The data types of variables are dynamic. Their type can change after they have been created. You can check the type by passing the variable into the type() function. Lastly, you can define variables in line if they will all be set to the same value.

```python
x = 42
name = 'Douglas Adams'
is_alive = False

print(type(x)) # prints <class 'int'>
x = 'Forty Two'
print(type(x)) # prints <class 'str'>

x = y = z = 5
print(x+y+z)   # prints 15
```

### Naming Conventions

Python has restrictions when it comes to naming variables.

* Names must start with a letter or underscore character
* Names cannot start with a number
* Names can only contain alphanumeric (A-Z or a-z) and underscore characters (\_)
* Names are case sensitive. YEAR is not equal to year

The Python community has best practices for variables names.

* Use names that make sense. For example, temperature instead of t
* Use snake\_case instead of camelCase
* Use uppercase when defining constants
