---
description: Collect and process data using tuples
---

# 3.2 Tuples

Tuples are another collection of objects in Python. They are like lists but with the exception of being immutable. You cannot add or remove items once the tuple is created. Tuples are recognized by values surround by parentheses or values separated by commas.

```python
tuple1 = 1,
tuple2 = (1,)
tuple3 = (1,2,3)

# create a new tuple by adding elements from existing tuples
tuple4 = tuple1 + tuple2 + tuple3

for item in tuple4:
    print(item)
```

The elements of a tuple can be accessed by their index or by slicing. Tuple indices start at 0. Check whether an element exists with an if-in condition.

```python
tuple1 = (1,2,3,4,5,6)
print(tuple1[0])    # prints 1
print(tuple1[1:3])  # prints (2,3)

if 4 in tuple1:
    print('The value 4 exists in the tuple')
```

### Modifying Tuples

You cannot modify elements in a tuple. However, you can convert a tuple to a list, modify the list, then convert the list into a tuple. This process creates a new tuple that shares no relationship with the original collection.

```python
tuple1 = (1,2,3,4,5,6)
list1 = list(tuple1)
list1.append(7)
tuple1 = tuple(list1)
print(tuple1)
```

{% hint style="success" %}
Keep in mind that tuples cannot be modified. Consider a different data structure if you find yourself needing to modify a tuple.
{% endhint %}

### Iterating Over Tuples

You can iterate over tuples the same way you can with lists.

```python
tuple1 = (1,2,3,4,5,6)
for value in tuple1:
    print(value)

for index in range(len(tuple1)):
    print(index, ":", tuple1[index])
```

### Lists Inside Tuples

Tuples can contain any object, just like lists. They can even contain other tuples and lists.

```python
tuple1 = (1, (2,3), [4,5,6])
print(tuple1[2])
```

### Lists Versus Tuples

The main difference between lists and tuples is that lists are mutable and tuples are not. Apart from that, there are a few different use cases where a tuple is preferred.

1. Tuples help developers identify data that should not be changed during the program execution
2. Tuples can be used as keys in dictionaries
3. Tuples perform slightly better in speed and memory usage than lists
