---
description: Perform different types of iterations
---

# 2.2 Loops and Iterations

### The Pass Statement

The pass statement is used as a placeholder for code that has not yet been implemented. Python scripts fail to run when loops and functions have an empty body. However, there may be times when you still want to run the script. In those cases, use the pass statement.

```python
if 1 < 88:
    pass

def connect_to_db():
    pass

for n in range(1,11):
    pass
```

### Building Loops

The **while loop** keeps repeating until a condition is no longer True. You can add an else-statement at the end of a while loop to execute once the condition is False.

```python
i = 4
while i >= 1:
    print(i)
    i -= 1

i = 4
while i >= 1:
    print(i)
    i -= 1
else:
    print('i is less than 1') # this line would always print
```

{% hint style="success" %}
The else-statement at the end of a while loop will always execute after the loop finishes unless the loop is stopped with a break statement.
{% endhint %}

A **for loop** is used to iterate over a sequence of values, a range of numbers, elements in a list, or the characters in a string. The "in" keyword is needed.

```python
names = ['Toad', 'Badger', 'Ratty', 'Mole']

for name in names:     # prints all the names in the names list
    print(name)

for n in names[0]:     # prints the individual letters in the name 'Toad'
    print(n)
```

Like while loops, for loops can also include an else-statement. The else-statement always executes unless the loop is stopped with a break statement.

The **range function** creates a sequence of numbers, which can be iterated over with a for loop. The sequence starts at 0 and iterates by 1 as the default behavior. The syntax is:

range_(stop_)

```python
for n in range(6):    # prints 0-5 on new lines
    print(n)
```

Range also accepts start and end parameters to give you more control over the sequence of numbers. The syntax is:

range_(start, stop, step_)

```python
for n in range(10, 21, 2): # prints even numbers between 10 and 21
    print(n)
```

A **break statement** can be used to stop a loop before it completes its iterations.

```python
names = ['Toad', 'Badger', 'Ratty', 'Mole']
for name in names:
    if name == 'Badger':
        print(name)
        break
```

A **continue statement** is similar to a break but instead of stopping the loop, it stops the current iteration and continues to the next iteration.

```python
names = ['Toad', 'Badger', 'Ratty', 'Mole']
for name in names:
    if name == 'Badger':
        continue
    print(name)
```

Remember, the else statement can be appended to the end of for loops. The else statement always executes once the for statement is finished.

```python
names = ['Toad', 'Badger', 'Ratty', 'Mole']
for name in names:
    if name == 'Badger':
        continue
    print(name)
else:
    print('Done with looping')
```

{% hint style="success" %}
Understand how or loops are structured. The PCEP exam will test your knowledge of how the keywords in loops are arranged.
{% endhint %}
